Please tell us your name. I'm Lagi Menkare
Nasorona. Dendul Lama. Dendul Lama. Thank
you. His Holiness the Dalai Lama asked us
to record your experiences so that we can
share your memories with many generations
of Tibetans, the Chinese, and the rest of
the world. Your memories will help us to
document the true history, culture, and
beliefs of the Tibetan people.
Do you give permission for the Tibet Oral
History Project to use this interview?
Thank you very much for offering to share
your story with us. During this interview,
if at any time you want to take a break or
stop, please let us know.
And if you do not want to answer a
question or talk about something, let us
know.
If your interview were to be shown in
Tibet or China, Would this be a problem
for you?
There will be no problems. Thank you. And
we're very honored to record your story
and appreciate very much your
participation in the project.
How old are you?
71.
And where are you from in Tibet?
So the place
where I lived was called La Gong. And in
which province was La Gong?
I came to Lhasa in 1961-62 when the
Chinese created a lot of problems.
Where were you born? In which province?
So when you came to Lhasa, you were about
how old?
So I must have been about 36 years old and
when I came to Lhasa I had three children
with me and then three were born in Lhasa.
Okay.
So that's been so long ago. In your
village, what did your father do?피유argent
How much money could we use to pay your
wife? How much is here? Here
in我们的能力和能力可在这个地方可以付你,
here in this steel house we don't have
enough to cover, so this is all we can do
in about an acre of land.
So in those days my father was a farmer
working in the commune and then we would
dig up medicinal plants called popi from
the ground. So you were in a commune, a
Tibetan commune, or was this a Chinese
commune? What is the meaning of the word
Nyaamle? The word Nyaamle is the meaning
of the father and the mother. The father
is the mother and the mother is the
mother. The father is the mother.
So it was a Tibetan commune run by Chinese
and the farmers harvested, when the
farmers harvested grains and wheat and
barley we would have to give them to the
Chinese so being unable to endure the
suffering my husband and I and children
fled or went to went to Lhasa. Went to
Lhasa, right. So what memories do you have
of your childhood when you were a little
girl?
I'm like, can I change you in a bit,
Kabla?
What should I say about when I was little?
I have no
memories of my younger days. Okay. What
did your mother do?
숏
So in the commune she had the task of
milking and then also carrying hay on the
back to be spread under the horses and
mules and then after we escaped I had no
idea about them but I think they have all
passed away now. So did you help your
mother or your father with their work on
the commune?
No,
because I had little children then, and so
instead of helping them, I needed their
help.
How old were you when you had your first
child?
So we don't normally calculate our years
and ages. So it was like, you know,
animals giving birth. Likewise, we too
gave birth to our children. Do your
children live with you now?
No, not together. I have three children,
and I had my children in the hospital. Can
you tell us about your experiences giving
birth to children? So, Marwa, you are a
very good teacher. You have taught us a
lot of things. So, what do you think about
teaching us how to be a good teacher? I
don't know how to teach. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I have been
teaching since I was a child. I don't know
how to teach. I don't know how to teach. I
don't know how to teach. I don't know how
to teach.
So I didn't give
birth
in hospitals and it was my husband that
helped me during the childbirth. and it
is only my daughter that was born in
hospital and I couldn't give birth to her
and all my other children including the
twins were not born in hospital. How did
your husband help you?
I was a little girl, and I was a little
girl. I was a little girl, and I was a
little girl. I was a little girl, and I
was a little girl. I was a little girl,
and I was a little girl. I was a little
girl, and I was a little girl. I was a
little girl, and I was a little girl. I
was a little girl, and I was a little
girl.
So when the first of the twins was born, I
was on my knees and my husband, he took
the child wrapped it in cloth and laid it
on the bed and then I went out to answer
nature's call and then I could feel that
there was another child in me and so I
told my husband that there is one more
child and he said it can't be but then I
said there is one more and then the other
one was born and while breastfeeding I had
to feed one child here and one child here
and it was same when I was feeding them
food later. At the same time, feeding them
one here, one here? At the same time.
Thujujjipa le chikla omadetje, chikla
omadetje, roa? Nyaka tew. Nyaka ngode.
Ngode nyaka sumte omadetje. Yes, because
both cried at the same time. Cried, cried.
And were all your children healthy when
they were born? Amla, puku ketiw ka ne
puku tsangma tangpo duwe? A instead of습니까
, the
So the second of the twins was born leg
first, and I thought it was a headless
child. And then my husband pulled it out,
and there was no crying, so I thought it
wasn't alive. And when I touched the leg,
it was warm, and then my husband cleaned
it up. How did you feel? Can you remember
your emotions?
twins, you know, if one child got sick
around 12 o'clock, the other would become
sick at 3 p.m. So both had to be carried
to the hospital in Pasa and it was very
difficult. And then later my husband found
work at a construction site and I could
also find work but I couldn't do much as I
was sick most of the time. So when you
were sick, who took care of your children?
one.
There wasn't
anyone else to take care of them. I had to
and then when my husband been returned
from work then we took care of them
together so when you lived in Lhasa did
you have family who also lived in Lhasa or
lived near you
I'm lucky that not me down pinga shambhala
in the hustle a your a your mother no no
both of us didn't have any relatives so
you said that you went to Lhasa and you
had three children what what made your
family go to Lhasa?
So we had to leave our hometown because we
couldn't survive there. there, there was
lack of food because if you couldn't work
hard, there was no grains for you, and
then since we had many children, both of
us couldn't survive there and that's why
my husband suggested that we go to Lhasa.
Why wasn't there enough food? And Magali,
how do you do the work? We do it by hand.
We do it by hand. We do it by hand. We do
it by hand. We do it by hand.
So in the commune system, you know, if you
could work, the officials gave you marks,
and if you didn't, you know, there was no
marks, which meant that you got no grains.
But you worked, didn't you? Did you eat
anything?
We did,
but there was nothing to eat, so we left.
Was it because you had so many children
that what you were allowed, what you were
allocated wasn't enough? That the Master
of the Pugongине Gövde. Has main Heckling
had the same architecture available with
Rei? Yes, it was possible there were
liveumen inside. Listen in the New York.
At北심, he visited the same place, ...
practiced Hitt
GI
Yeah, the allocation wasn't sufficient.
Right. And then when we were in Hassa, a
friend of my husband suggested that, you
know, since we had many children, that if
we went to Nepal, it would be a better
life for the children. So that's why we
came to Nepal. Right. Right. We'll come
back to Nepal in a minute, but I was
wondering, in what ways was life in Lhasa
different from life in the village?
The people of the village, they are very
good at it. They are very good at it. They
are very good at it. They are very good at
it. They are very good at it. They are
very good at it. They are very good at it.
They are very good at it. They are very
good at it. They are very good at it. They
are very good at it. They are very good at
it. They are very good at it.
So it was
better in Lhasa because my husband was
engaged in the construction. work and then
friends and other people they used to give
us little bags of Sambal. Were there other
ways in which your life in Lhasa was
different from the village? You had more
food but were there other ways in which
your life was different?
I don't know, I can't say.
So I have only so much to say. Right. So
your family decided to come to Nepal. Can
you tell us the story of coming to Nepal?
The women used to marry them like a
princess.
Tengri? Yes, Cassandra would marry
Cassandra, Mr. Park and Mrs. MEntry. Mr. M
werner and Mrs. Kim . If Mr. M would buy a
present, Mrs. Park would buy a toy.
alienating people who die as citizens
these problems with an international
officially
There were times when we were on foot, and
at times for an hour or two, we would ply
by vehicles, but since we didn't have
money to pay, we couldn't get vehicles
right through. And it was from the border
area of Tingri and Tamil that we came
towards Nepal. And we were with quite a
number of little children, and my husband
was carrying one of the twins over his
neck, and the oldest son was carrying one
of the other twins and the pathway was
filled with snow and there were some
Chinese people along the way that stopped
us but since we were with little children
they allowed us to go and in fact there
were two girls that commented that the
twins were very beautiful and then thanks
to the grace of His Holiness we were able
to escape safely. How long did it take you
to come from Lhasa to Nepal? We came from
Lhasa to Paya Bado, and then we went to
Khorso. We came from Khorso to Khorso. We
came from Khorso
to Khorso.
So it might have taken about half a month,
because at times we were walking and at
times we could get lift in some vehicles.
So what did you take with you when you
left Tibet?
Mother Interior Deepa,
can you judgge us about the ABS Act.
So we had brought nothing except our
blankets and a little bit of samba. And
when we reached Nepal, my husband had
friends to whom we sent message, and they
came to fetch us at the reception
committee office. And did you have enough
food, enough sampa for your whole family
to go for these two weeks?
who had gone to48 countries throughout the
history of the plant Thank my
father for having sent me. so that my
father not only No. 1 But also another
I wasn open to seeing everything so that
inspired me much more Toら has a very nice
name I think it's a very
nice name I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very
So we had a little bit of sampa, and I
used to feed the children in spoonfuls,
which they used to gulp. and then we were
able to cross over a mountain and there
was a river and nearby we found some
Nepalese police and we were really very
scared and I told my husband, will they
not kill us now? And then we met some
merchants who said that now you need have
no fear because you are in Nepalese
territory and you will no longer fall into
Chinese hands. But still they were very
scared. And then we saw some Nepali road
crew and they were living in little tents
and so we entered one of the tents and
they gave us hot water and I made little
balls of dough with the Sampar and hot
water and fed my children. And then we
went to Dharamsala and we were very happy
to see His So you arrived in Nepal and
then how did you get to Dharamsala?
The reception committee there dropped us
to Dharamsala. I want to go back to make
sure I've understood something. So your
decision to leave Nepal, I mean to leave
Tibet, was because of hunger? What was the
reason why you left Tibet? Tibet.
Now meditating isau mechawawa le me
choramento kiajisau
kgavgise
zau
sothava.
And very cupid and Hassa was better and
then in the hometown but our children were
not getting any education in Hassa so and
we were told that if we went to Nepal we
would be able to admit our children into
school so for the sake of our children we
left Tibet. So you lived in Tibet when the
Chinese were there. How was life like like
for you under the Chinese?
So I do not have much knowledge. That's
between in the offices that happens and my
job was just doing my work. And your work
was what? What was your work? In Amalagi,
I was teaching. I was teaching the
students and the teachers.
So our responsibility was harvesting the
barley and then de-husking them in a large
open ground during the commune, but I have
forgotten much of it. What about in Lhasa?
What was your work in Lhasa? In Lhasa, we
used to go to the forest to buy food. We
used to go to the forest to buy
food. I don't know how to do it. I don't
know how to do it. I don't know how to do
it. I don't know how to do it.
It's like what I told you earlier,
constructing houses, digging the ground,
laying the bricks, and building as it
happens here. You did that. Amla Adinala,
Lera Cheyina, Kambas Yuga Dwaya Adinala. I
did it like this. Like this. No, I
couldn't go to work because I was sick.
Right. Okay. Did you have any interactions
with Chinese people?
No. So did life change for you when the
Chinese came to you? No. Did life
change for you when the Chinese came to
Tibet?
Yes, in 1961-62, by then the Chinese had
already launched the liberation. And at
that time, when my husband and I escaped,
there wasn't many people escaping then,
but later on, more and more people started
coming. And what happened then?
Once we were at the reception center here
and then we were sent to see His Holiness
the Dalai Lama in the Ramsala and then the
children were put in school and then my
husband and I, we were sent to a factory
in Dalahousey in Himachal Pradesh and then
there was no problem at all. Was your
husband affected at all by the Chinese
occupation?
That's why I'm saying that he
was a construction worker. He was a
construction worker in Pasta. He was
laying the iron rods for the construction.
After coming into India, he worked as an
embosser of handmade carpets. Right at the
beginning you mentioned that most of your
children except for your last child were
born at home. But one child was born in
the hospital. Why was that child born in
the hospital? What caused you to go to the
hospital for that birth?
So I was having labor pains but could not
give birth. So that's why I went to the
hospital. And your baby was safe. And the
boy, how was he? Was he okay? He was okay.
He was okay. He was okay. He was fine.
Amen. He was fine. He was fine. He was
fine. I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very young, I was very young, I was
very young, I was very young, I was very
young, I was very young, I was very young,
I was very last child was born in hospital
after five or six days. Actually the labor
pains had started and the child wasn't
born so the nurse told me that I would
have to stay in hospital for a few days
because it was a big child but I didn't
want to stay and wanted to go back home
and my husband said that you know wouldn't
take me home saying that you know If we
went back home, the child and I would die.
Is there anything else that you would like
to share with us about your life in Tibet?
That's about it.
Thank you. If this interview were shown in
Tibet or China, would it be a problem for
you?
I don't know
whether there will be any problems or no
problems. Is it okay if we use your real
name? I think that's the way it is. I
think that's the way it is. I think that's
the way it is. Yes, it is. If I had a lot
of money, I would have a lot of money.
Yes, but then if the Chinese come and
investigate, they may take me away. Thank
you very much for sharing your story with
us.